# Chapter 21.1: INQUIRY OF THE FOURTH NOBLE TRUTH:

### ID: p22-1
We’ve found that it’s useful to make inquiry and investigation a normal part of our everyday routine, especially when we’re feeling uncomfortable emotions or facing tough decisions. We can take a moment to pause and sit with what we’re experiencing, identify it, and simply allow it to be, with compassion and without judgment. Then use the Eightfold Path as a guide to go inward and forward by asking ourselves: “How can I apply the Eightfold Path?” It can also be beneficial to use the different sections of the Eightfold Path as an end-of-day reflection.

### ID: p23-1
As we engage in the world, rather than withdraw from it, we can use Wise Understanding to live without clinging, attachment, or craving. By paying attention to our actions and the results of those actions, we can begin to change where our choices are leading. If we intend to act in ways that have positive results, and if we’re aware of the true intention and the nature of our actions, then we’ll see better results — better meaning less suffering and less harm.

### ID: p23-2
The word karma in Sanskrit translates to “what our actions cre ate.” Any intentional act — mental, verbal, or physical — is a kind of karma. Skillful or wise actions strengthen our sense of balance, kindness, compassion, loving, and equanimity. When we act unskillfully or un wisely — when we steal, lie, take advantage of somebody else, or cause intentional harm based on our own craving or delusions — it creates an immediate sense of imbalance. It fights with our intention to avoid harming others. Karma is determined by our intention and applies to any volitional or purposeful action. The result of our volitional actions may be an increase in our happiness or may lead to additional suffering. There is no actor apart from action, and there is no action without intention.

### ID: p23-3
Unskillful actions leave us less able to meet the next challenge or pain we face. For example, when we steal, we have to immediately justify to ourselves why our greed was more important than the harm we caused by taking. We must create a cover story, hide our actions, and adjust to the fear of getting caught. Ultimately, if the theft gets discovered, we might have to deal with financial or legal consequences, or face a lack of trust from our community. Similarly, when we’re dishonest, we immediately focus energy on maintaining the untruth. We must emotionally carry the potential pain that is caused to others, and ourselves, if the lie is revealed.

### ID: p23-4
This understanding of karma rests on the insight that we are responsible for our own happiness and misery, and there is a cause to every experience of happiness or misery. From a Buddhist point of view, our choices — which are dependent on our present mental, moral, intellectual, and emotional conditions — decide the effects of our actions. If we act skillfully, with understanding and compassion, it’s possible to cause positive, beneficial effects for ourselves and others. If we act with unskillful intention, we cause our own suffering.

### ID: p23-5
This doesn’t mean that we always have control over our experiences. No matter how skillfully we act, the external world — people, places, things, societal structures — might not give us what we want. This does not mean we have “bad karma,” or that we’ve failed. It just means that we’re not in control of everything and everyone. The point is that, regardless of what the outside world throws at us, we’re responsible for how we respond to it and how we tend to our internal world. At the end of the day, we have the choice whether we go to bed as somebody who acted wisely and compassionately, or as somebody who didn’t.

### ID: p23-6
It’s important to note that being responsible for our own hap piness and suffering doesn’t mean we’re responsible for pain inflicted on us by others, or by circumstances out of our control. Many of us have experiences of victimization, oppression, and trauma through no fault of our own. The pain from these experiences should be met with compassion, understanding, and wise boundaries, not minimized, invalidated, or pushed away. In recovery, we learn that we don’t have to add an extra layer of suffering to this pain. We can begin to heal rather than let these experiences or the action of others control and limit us. Without discounting or ignoring the ongoing effects of trauma in our lives, we begin to understand that our responses when that trauma comes up for us, can change our experience of suffering and happiness.

### ID: p23-7
The Buddhist perspective is that our present mental, moral, in tellectual, and emotional circumstances are the direct result of our ac tions and habits, both past and present. How we choose to respond when confronted with pain or discomfort will change our ability to skillfully deal with suffering when it arises. We can also take solace in the fact that we’re not alone, that every person has difficult and unpleasant experienc es. It’s how we respond to pain that determines our experience.
