# Chapter 23.1: INQUIRY OF WISE UNDERSTANDING:

### ID: p24-1
Wise Intention describes the attitude or approach we take to ward ourselves and the world. We can choose non-harming by avoiding actions that have harmful results, detaching from the cravings that seem overwhelming in the moment, and developing a kind and compassionate stance toward ourselves and the world. Wise Intention leads us to stop doing things based on confusion, ill-will, hatred, violence, and selfish ness. It impacts all our relationships: with ourselves, other people, our community, and the world as a whole.

### ID: p24-2
Wise Intention is deciding to act in ways that produce good kar ma and to avoid actions that produce bad karma. We start by looking at the kinds of thoughts that cause us to act in wise or unwise ways. If our thoughts are based on confusion, fear, and greed, then our actions will bring bad results and create harm. If our thoughts are based on generos ity, compassion, and avoiding clinging, then our actions will bring good results. Thoughts that are based in lovingkindness and goodwill, that are free from the desire or intention to cause harm, lead us to act in a beneficial manner.

### ID: p24-3
There may be times when we don’t necessarily want to act in a beneficial manner. We may know the right thing to do, but just don’t want to do it. It’s in these moments we can focus on our intention. May be we aren’t ready to do the difficult thing, to quit a certain behavior, to set a boundary, or forgive someone for whom we hold a resentment. But we can set the intention to do so, and investigate our willingness in meditation by repeating statements like “May I have the willingness to forgive…. May I have the willingness to quit smoking (or skip that piece of cake, or stay off the internet tonight, etc.)…. May I have the willingness to make amends to my partner.”

### ID: p24-5
The first choice we can make in Wise Intention is that of generosity. Generosity teaches us how to let go of our self-centeredness, to let go of clinging to ideas of “mine” and “me.” Selfishness, or self centeredness, is one of the ways we justify and cling to our addictive behaviors. Generosity comes from the awareness that we’re holding on too tightly to our selfishness. The karmic result of looking at the world only through the lens of “me” and “mine” and “what I want” leads to loneliness, sepa ration, and dissatisfaction. Letting go of this clinging can be the solution. Letting go of “me” and “mine” does not mean you need to stop acknowl edging your social identities within your community.

### ID: p24-6
Without generosity, the mind is confined to a small, tight space. Anything that’s not about “me and mine” is off limits. At times in our lives when we become dependent, our world becomes focused on sat isfying our cravings, on holding onto what we want right now. We get sucked into the reactivity of survival mode, believing that we must have our addictive substance or behavior to survive. Our "needs" for relief or pleasure consume us, and we become blind to the needs of those around us. We may even begin to see them as threats.

### ID: p24-7
We can break out of this cycle by opening our hearts: by being present for, and in service to other people. Generosity allows space to re spond to those around us, to include their well-being in our choices. This can, of course, be a tricky concept for those of us who struggle with issues of codependency. Generosity does not mean giving of ourselves without boundaries until we are depleted. It does not mean using “helping” as a form of manipulation to get what we want. Again, what’s important here is that we’re honest about the intention behind our actions.

### ID: p24-8
We try not to confuse intent with impact. Our intention may be to not harm, but sometimes the impact is that someone feels hurt. Many of us have experienced this in our addictions. Without intending to, and often without even being aware of it, we’ve created harm in other people’s lives. The way we choose to practice compassion in recovery is by being accountable when our actions hurt someone, and by acknowledging this hurt without blame or shame, defensiveness or justification. This includes when we offend someone by inadvertently using unwise speech or actions in regards to their social identity, such as race or gender. In these moments, it is important to recognize the difference between intent and impact, and having a deep appreciation and compassion for the interconnectedness among us all.

### ID: p24-9
Generosity allows us to cultivate **appreciative joy**, which is one of the four **heart practices** of Buddhism, along with compassion, lov ingkindness, and equanimity. Joyful appreciation is simply being hap py when somebody else has good fortune, happiness, and peacefulness. Generosity lets us appreciate the happiness of others rather than having feelings of envy, jealousy, or wanting them to be just a bit less happy so we seem a little happier by comparison. We want the other person’s hap piness to increase, for them to become more at peace, and so we learn to appreciate those things in their lives. In the moment of giving, of generosity, we’ve let go of self-centered desire and grasping what is “mine,” or what brings me pleasure. We’re giving up any ill-will or aversion we feel toward the person and toward the world. Instead of creating separation and withdrawal, we’re actively fostering appreciation for the closeness and connectedness of the world.

### ID: p24-10
This is a joy that’s not obstructed by selfish desires, envy, or re sentment. It’s the purity of happiness for someone else’s good fortune. We can choose to cultivate this feeling of joy in the happiness and success of others, without the need to compete or compare. It’s actually a feeling that’s natural to humans, but it’s often neglected when our attention is focused on selfish craving. This is the true seat of generosity: delighting in the happiness of others, without needing anything in return.

### ID: p24-11
The second heart practice is **compassion**, which is first of all a will ingness to come close to pain: to recognize it, honor it, acknowledge it, and respond to it wisely. This isn’t easy, because just as we want to run from or suppress our own pain, we also want to avoid being with the pain of others. Compassion means sitting with our own pain and that of others. It stops the cruelty of indifference. Compassion for ourselves is crucial. Self-compassion is the key to healing the shame and guilt that we often feel as we begin to recognize the harms we caused through our addictions. You may also find that compassion is difficult to realize when it comes to those who have caused you great harm. In these cases, it can be helpful to focus on your own healing by practicing self compassion, engaging in wise reflection of the Four Noble Truths, and committing to the practices of the path. With time, you may gradually wish for the relief of suffering for those who have hurt you.

### ID: p24-12
Compassion is not just offering sympathy and a helping hand. It’s also an intention to avoid causing harm to others and ourselves. This is where we can most easily see the difference between skillful and un skillful actions, and between wise and unwise intentions. Cruelty — and all the harm it creates in the world — comes from a lack of compassion. Cruelty is a desire to cause pain. Compassion is caring about the welfare and happiness of others. Compassion rests on the renunciation of harm ing living beings and is not only the wish, but also the intention to put an end to their suffering. We need to open our hearts — not just our minds — to all the suffering that is experienced in the world. Compassion is not only a feeling: it is an action.

### ID: p24-13
The 3rd heart practice is **lovingkindness**, also known as **metta**. These are thoughts that are free from ill-will, simply wishing that some body else be happy, that they be well, and free from suffering. It’s the choice to consider the well-being of everyone in how we interact with the world. Metta isn’t conditional: it isn’t something we offer only to people we like. We can have concern and care even when we’re feeling our own pain. We can bring metta to mind when we’re faced with difficulty or torn by conflicting feelings about the conditions of life at the moment. Metta doesn’t depend on people acting in a certain way, on our feeling a certain way in the moment, or on the result of our caring. It frees us from only caring about the well-being of others when we think it will lead to some outcome. With metta, we don’t ask the question “Will it do any good to care about this person’s well-being?”

### ID: p24-14
This means that how we think about another person isn’t based on their behavior, or even on the other person at all. How we think about a person is up to us—and if it’s shaped by the practice of metta, then we can care about every person’s well-being, even the most difficult and unpleasant people we know. We can honestly hope that everyone finds a way to be happy without causing harm. Wishing this goodwill towards others frees us from the reactivity and anger that can come when we focus on the person’s behavior or what we think they “ought” to do. We can begin to see the suffering and pain that somebody experiences as a result of their actions, and care about that pain even if it might also lead to pain for us or for others. Our wish is that all beings are free from pain and suffering, that they escape hatred and fear, that they are at ease, and that they find happiness.

### ID: p24-15
Generosity, compassion, and lovingkindness make forgiveness not only possible, but also essential for recovery. Forgiveness rests on understanding and caring about the pain and confusion that give rise to actions that we experience as harmful. We forgive when we focus on the person, rather than the action. We forgive only in the present when our hurt and anger make us aware that our resentment is blocking our own compassionate and generous responses. Forgiveness is not so much something we are giving to the person who hurt us, but something we give to ourselves. It’s centered more on our own conscious intention in how we choose to respond to them. Just as we sometimes act out of fear, greed, or confusion, we see that others do too. Forgiveness doesn’t mean we accept or tolerate harm. It comes from understanding and accepting that the person causing us harm is doing so from a place of pain and confusion. We extend compassion and goodwill to that person, even as we actively try to end the harm. This may mean creating safe boundaries or removing ourselves from exposure to harm. But we do this from a place of compassion and understanding, not resentment.

### ID: p24-16
It is *essential* that we extend the healing of forgiveness and compassion to ourselves. Forgiveness allows us to let go of the guilt and shame of our own harmful actions. We remember that compassion is an action, so when we forgive ourselves we also set an intention not to re-create or continue the harm we have caused to others and to ourselves.

### ID: p24-17
Making amends is an important part of forgiveness. As we begin to gain clarity about the harm we caused in our addiction, we commit to make amends for that harmful behavior. We don’t make amends for the sake of satisfying some external standard of morality, to be forgiven, or to get something in return. Instead, we use the process as a way to let go of our expectations and disappointments in others and ourselves — in other words, to let go of our attachment to a different past.

### ID: p24-18
One of the central principles of karma is realizing that I alone am responsible for the way my past actions impact my current responses to the world. We change our habits by letting go of the past and restoring balance in our relationships. Things we did in the past create patterns of behavior that continue to shape our thoughts and intentions in the present. That process doesn’t stop until we change our relationship with those patterns, and toward the people we’ve harmed. Amends are about restoring the balance in our relationships, not about asking for forgive ness from others. In a sense, it is an action we take to forgive ourselves.

### ID: p24-19
When we have come to understand and face the reality of our impact on others, we begin to understand the purpose of making amends. Practicing compassion leads to a desire to relieve the suffering of people we’ve harmed, and a commitment to not cause further suffering. Even if the person isn’t a part of our lives any longer, it’s possible to acknowledge their hurt and to offer them our goodwill and our remorse. Making amends means we do what we can to remedy the harm or wrong. If that is not possible, we resolve to do some good, not as compensation, but to develop our habits in a different direction. When we intention ally take responsibility for our actions, we let go of harmful avoidance and self-judgment and develop a sense of connectedness, peace, and ease. Amends begin with a willingness to forgive ourselves and take the path of reconciliation: not only with those we have harmed, but also with our own hearts and minds.

### ID: p24-20
Generosity, compassion, lovingkindness, and forgiveness allow us to experience equanimity as we face pain and discomfort, both in ourselves and others. The fourth heart practice is **equanimity**. During our addictions, we often responded to situations that caused us anger, fear, or resentment with a craving that the situations be different. We gave up and surrendered to the negative experience of life. Equanimity does not mean giving up; it is more a quality of leaning in. It is finding peace exactly where we are, regardless of external circumstances. Equanimity allows us to be right in the middle of things, to understand and accept things as they are without needing to escape. When we gave up, we said, “I don’t care what happens.” Equanimity, on the other hand, is being able to say, “I can be present for this.” It’s the acceptance that while there are some things we cannot change, we still have power over how we respond to them. While we don’t always have control over our thoughts and feel ings, we do have power over how we feed them.
