# Chapter 24.1: INQUIRY OF WISE INTENTION:

### ID: p25-1
Wise Speech is based on the intention to do no harm. We’ve all used speech in a manner that may create harm: lying to keep others from knowing what’s really going on; gossiping with the intention of putting someone down or satisfying our desire to be recognized; stealing time and attention by chattering on and on; or trying to convince others to meet our own needs at the expense of their own. Wise Speech includes all the ways we use our voices, including online and in writing.

### ID: p25-2
The basic foundation of Wise Speech is honesty or truthfulness. Dishonesty is exaggeration, minimizing, omitting or lying with the in tention of presenting a distortion of reality. It can take the form of “white lies” to avoid embarrassment or exposure, half-truths to keep from being caught, or seemingly harmless things said at the expense of others. We may say more than we really know to be true in the hopes of appearing smarter or more confident in our position or feeling. Sometimes we say something before we know the truth.

### ID: p25-3
Dishonesty has to do with our intention in speech. Are we moti vated by greed, fear, or confusion? Or are we motivated by a sincere desire to express what’s true, what’s useful, what’s kind, and what’s timely? Wise Speech means we speak with the intention of not causing harm, and of fostering safety and security in our community.

### ID: p25-4
In active addiction, we develop the habit of dishonesty. We lie to cover up or mislead others about the nature and extent of our using or behavior. We lie so we can satisfy the craving our fixation feeds, by hiding our actions, our feelings, or the amount of money and effort we put into satisfying our craving. Many of us lie just for the sake of lying because the truth represents a reality we can’t tolerate. We get trapped by our secrets, and for many of us, having a double life becomes an addiction all its own. This is why honesty is foundational to recovery. Dishonesty is one of the habits that allow our addictive behaviors to flourish. As a result, recovery needs to start with an honest appraisal of exactly what lies we told and what dishonesty we spread during our addictive behavior.

### ID: p25-5
The Buddha provided some guidelines for Wise Speech, in ad dition to truthfulness. He said to avoid slander and gossip, recognizing that such unwise speech causes conflict and makes the community less safe. So, when we talk about others, we can ask ourselves: What’s our intention? Is it to cause division or exclusion? Is it to cause shame or em barrassment in someone else, or to somehow make ourselves look better at somebody else’s expense? It’s possible to talk about other people with the intention of kindness, generosity, and compassion, to seek understanding or support for another. Gossip and slander do not contribute to this and instead, cause harm. Similarly, idle chatter and saying things just to be heard or recognized, or to take up time when we’re uncomfortable, can lead people to dismiss or ignore us and may create impatience and intolerance in our community.

### ID: p25-6
Wise Speech is also reflected in the tone we use when we talk. If we express ourselves in harsh, angry, or abusive ways, we may not be heard even if we’re being truthful. Speaking gently, with the intention of kindness, fosters a community of friendliness and safety. There are always exceptions, of course, and Wise Speech also includes using a loud and strong voice when you need to protect your safety.

### ID: p25-9
It may sound like Wise Speech is primarily about discerning when not to speak, but this isn’t always the case. Many of us grew up in families where it wasn’t safe to talk openly about our thoughts and feelings. Some, because of certain experiences or cultural conditioning, have been taught that we don’t have permission to use our voices or lack the power to speak and be heard. For many of us, practicing Wise Speech may mean learning how to use our voices that have been silenced, and to wisely communicate the needs and boundaries we’ve gotten used to keep ing hidden. At times, this includes speaking up for others when harm is done. Many of us, in an effort to be liked, for fear of rocking the boat, or due to the exhaustion of repeatedly not being seen and heard, have favored being nice over being honest and true to ourselves. Wise Speech teaches us that speaking up, even when it’s hard, is sometimes the best choice, and that speech is never truly kind if we cause harm to ourselves.

### ID: p25-10
Finally, Wise Speech is careful listening. It is also knowing when not to speak when a wise response isn’t available to us. We must listen with compassion, understanding, and receptivity. It can be really helpful to observe how much of the time we spend “listening” to someone else is actually spent judging them or planning what we’re going to say in response. Deep listening — without selfishness, or an agenda — is an act of generosity that lets us build true connection.
