# Chapter 27.1: INQUIRY OF WISE LIVELIHOOD:

### ID: p28-1
Wise Effort is the first of the concentration group. It means  concentrating our effort on understanding and recovery and awakening.  Wise Effort isn’t based on how much we should meditate, how much  service we should do, or how much time we put into healthy activity. Instead, it’s the intention to devote balanced energy to supporting the  other parts of the path, particularly wisdom.

### ID: p28-2
The first thing to pay attention to is avoiding situations and  states of mind that can lead to unethical, unskillful, or harmful respons es. We become more aware of conditions in our lives and investigate our  own responses and reactions to those conditions. When we’re operating  out of greed, ignorance, confusion, or thinking we can get what we want,  we need to be aware of that. We put in the effort and energy to under stand what circumstances allowed these conditions to arise and how we  can begin to move away from those responses.

### ID: p28-3
Energy or effort is also devoted to letting compassion, lovingk indness, generosity, and forgiveness arise when they’re not present. If we  find ourselves reacting with anger rather than compassion, fear instead  of generosity, blame instead of forgiveness, we can ask how we would  respond if those positive factors were present, and begin to respond more  skillfully. Being hard on ourselves, beating ourselves up, and suffering  from perfectionism are all familiar feelings during addiction and recov ery. When we shame ourselves for not being good enough, not trying  hard enough, not being enough, these are perfect opportunities to prac tice Wise Effort, to reflect on the question, “In this moment, how can I  be kind and gentle with myself?”

### ID: p28-3
In early recovery, we may be most interested in damage control:  simply stopping the destruction and demoralization we have suffered  through our habitual, unskillful responses to craving. We can begin by  awareness of that craving, and learning to make different choices that  don’t trigger the craving. Sometimes awareness is enough; sometimes  that’s all the effort we can muster. As we learn more skillful responses  to our triggers, we gain space to have more compassion, lovingkindness,  generosity, and forgiveness. And as this practice becomes more of a habit,  equanimity and peacefulness begin to replace our habits of grasping and  selfishness. Pacing ourselves is important, alternating periods of activity  and rest. We need to be aware of what our mind, emotions, body, and  recovery can handle right now, and avoid the stress that can come from  pushing ourselves too far, too fast. We need to avoid those things that  put us into unskillful mind-states, and try to do things that return us to  a more easeful way of being in the present moment.

### ID: p28-4
Try to remember that whatever your experience is right now,  it will pass. Remind yourself that you don’t really know how long an  unpleasant or painful experience will last. Try to be open to recognizing  and investigating the experience while it is present, without interpreting it as a permanent part of your experience. Recognizing that the craving,  experience, or thought will pass makes it easier to avoid the impulse to  make an immediate, unskillful response.
