# Chapter 29.1: INQUIRY OF WISE MINDFULNESS:

### ID: p30-1
The final aspect of the Eightfold Path is Wise Concentration.  Meditation practice begins with concentrating on the breath, the body,  the emotional tone of the moment, and the processes of the mind, be cause these things exist in the present moment. If we focus on breath,  for example, we’re paying attention to the present moment because our  breathing is immediate: it’s happening right now. Breathing is a natural  process that doesn’t require judgment or interpretation, and so it eases  the mind from the need to react.

### ID: p30-2
The purpose of concentration is to train the mind to be focused  and undistracted. Most of us, early in meditation practice, are distracted  by things around us; like a noise outside the room, a pain or discomfort  in our bodies, our own worries or judgments of the experience, bore dom or weariness, or thoughts and plans. These distractions can lead to  a feeling of unease or restlessness. This is perfectly normal. In our addic tions, we nurtured the habit of distracting ourselves and for many of us,  it became a survival technique. Concentration meditation gives us the  opportunity to meet this habit with kindness and patience rather than  resistance.

### ID: p30-3
Concentration, like the rest of the factors of the Eightfold Path,  is a practice. As with any practice, it takes time and effort to learn a new way to focus attention. In meditation, simply noting the distraction, accepting that it exists, and then refocusing our mind back to the object of concentration, is the practice. If we become focused on discomfort, thoughts, or plans, we need to first recognize that it’s happening, and  then become curious about it. Then we can make the choice to refocus —  to concentrate on the object of the meditation. Our habitual patterns can  seduce us into thinking we’re doing it wrong, into judging our practice, or into giving up. Don’t let them. When we observe what the mind is  telling us and react with compassion, knowing we have the power to  recognize it and refocus it, we strengthen our ability to concentrate.

### ID: p30-4
Concentration can be especially helpful in times of craving. In stead of getting lost in the delusion that we must have what we’re craving,  we can trust that the craving is only temporary and refocus our attention  on our intention to act wisely. This may simply be the three-breath pause  mentioned earlier, or a more formal sitting meditation concentrating on  the breath. We can use concentration meditation to train our minds to  focus on a helpful thought in the midst of temporary discomfort and  the yearning for a quick fix. This may take the form of repeated phrases  to focus and clear the mind, such as metta, compassion, or equanimity  meditations. It could also take the form of prayer, chanting, a self-affirmation, a mantra, or another form of focused attention. Concentration  practices can often bring a sense of well-being and peace in a time of tur moil. They’re a healthy way to return to a balanced, resilient state when  we’re stressed or agitated.

### ID: p30-5
Sometimes when cravings or unpleasant emotions are particular ly strong, moving the body can be the best way to help refocus our energy  and find relief. Concentration at those times may mean being focused  and mindful about each movement we are making: this is my foot taking  a step, this is my hand reaching for the cup. After a few minutes of concen tration practice, of not giving energy to our craving or obsession, we may  find the intensity of the feeling has passed. The more we do this, the more  we gain confidence that we have the power to relieve the suffering of our  addiction through following this path and committing to this practice.

### ID: p30-6
For trauma survivors, the breath, the heart, and the mind can be  potentially overwhelming places to place the attention. So if traditional  anchors like breath and body are challenging, ask yourself: What helps  you stay present? What helps to calm your nervous system? It might be  feeling the floor beneath you, or holding a stone, or looking at a piece  of art on the wall. All that you need to be present is to pay attention to  something happening right now.

### ID: p30-7
If you feel powerful emotions begin to arise during meditation,  there are some simple things you can do to remain present. For example,  you can open your eyes rather than keeping them closed, or give yourself  permission to back off from the practice you are working on. Do whatever you need to do to take care of yourself should such a state arise, wheth er that is taking some deep breaths, putting a name on your experience  (such as “flashback”), or silently repeating some compassionate phrases to yourself. Learning to turn our attention back and forth between challenging sensations and our own supportive resources is a valuable skill  that professionals call titration. You can be gentle with your practice as  you are working to develop this skill.
