# Chapter 29: WISE MINDFULNESS:

### ID: p29-1
Mindfulness — being present to what’s going on in our minds, bodies, hearts, and world — is central to the practice of the Eightfold Path. We learn to be present for the way things are with compassion, without judging them or ourselves. Mindfulness is being aware of what ever is present, noticing it, and letting it pass. It’s also remembering that we’re on a path leading to our freedom and long-lasting happiness.

### ID: p29-2
Mindfulness asks us to be aware and to investigate, without the reactivity and grasping for control that leads to suffering. We learn to stay attentive to what’s happening without having to either react to or deny what’s happening. For many of us, our addictions prevented us from being mindful. In fact, that was often the whole point: we used our substances and behaviors to avoid feeling, to avoid being aware, because being aware was painful. But by trying to avoid pain, we often creat ed more suffering. We’re now making a different choice — to sit with the discomfort rather than pushing it away or trying to numb it. We can learn to sit with the discomfort in different ways, either by bringing awareness to the physical sensations that affect our bodies or in a more distant, non-attached way, such as naming the emotions while allowing them to arise and cease. We’re choosing to respond to it with mindful investigation and compassion, and to trust that it will pass if we let it. We’re remembering that there’s another way to respond to the difficulties of life.

### ID: p29-3
Our minds can get lost in how we react to experiences. When something happens, we almost immediately begin to create a story, plan, or fantasy about it. We have a thought about an experience, that thought leads to another, and on and on until we’re far from a real understanding of the experience itself. Mindfulness is noticing the experience in that moment before we get lost in the judgment of the moment or the stories we spin about it. Rather than blindly following our reactions and responses to an experience, mindfulness allows us the space to choose to respond skillfully and from a place of wisdom and morality.

### ID: p29-4
Mindfulness encourages us to be open to and investigate the painful experiences (and our habitual reactions to those experiences), rather than to deny, ignore, suppress, or run from them. Most of us have been conditioned to be our own harshest critic from early on, especially during our fixations on substances and behaviors. We carry the shadow of that judgment with us, even as we seek recovery, giving ourselves nega  tive feedback and scrutinizing every effort we make, holding ourselves to impossible standards of perfection. Letting go of that inner critic allows us to be mindful in the present of the efforts we are making, mindful of the compassion and lovingkindness we’re learning to make a part of our practice and our lives. Remember that we often talk way more harshly to ourselves than we ever would to somebody else. It’s useful to notice when we’re treating ourselves too harshly, and then shift attention to what we are doing well. We can acknowledge the negative thought, and then gen tly let it go.

### ID: p29-5
Mindfulness practice is based on the Satipatthana Sutta, or the **four foundations of mindfulness**. The 1st foundation, **mindfulness of the body**, asks us to bring awareness, attention, or focus on our breath and to bodily sensations. Meditations on the breath and body are focused on this awareness. The 2nd foundation is **mindfulness of feeling and feeling tones**. This practice involves noticing the emotional tone — pleasure or displeasure — that comes with every sensation, even when the sensation is a thought. It also encourages us to notice when a sensation is neither pleasant nor unpleasant but feels neutral. For example, we can experience inhales and exhales by noticing where in our body we feel the breath most directly. The second foundation instructs us to notice those sensations that are neutral, as well as those that are pleasant or unpleasant.

### ID: p29-6
The third foundation, **mindfulness of the mind**, asks us to notice when attachment — also known as greed or wanting — comes up, and to be aware that attachment arises in the mind. We also learn to notice when the mind is not attached to a particular thought or sensation. The same practice of noticing applies when we become aware of aversion, which we can experience as resistance or even hatred. When aversion isn’t present in the mind, we can notice that the mind is free from aversion.

### ID: p29-7
In the fourth foundation of mindfulness, **mindfulness of dhammas**, we begin to simply notice when a thought arises, being aware of it without judgment or evaluation, and allowing it to pass away without holding onto it and without creating a story out of it. Training in the fourth foundation lets us be aware of thoughts arising and passing away, and realizing each will pass when we let go.

### ID: p29-8
Two simple practices can make mindfulness a part of our daily lives. First, we can stop whatever we’re doing at any moment, and pay attention to the physical sensation of three in-breaths and three out breaths. This simple practice grounds our attention in what’s present right now, rather than in the voices and critics we carry with us. Shift ing from the stories and judgments we constantly create during the day to this simple grounding practice of three breaths gives us the space we sometimes need to return to mindfulness of the present moment.

### ID: p29-9
A second practice is to take time to inquire into the truthful ness of the negative or difficult messages we give ourselves. First, take time to ask yourself whether the message is true. Second, ask how sure you are that it’s true. Are you absolutely certain about what may seem like an easy or automatic truth? Third, notice how you feel when you believe the thought: Does it lead to fear, anger, sadness, desire? Finally, reflect on who you’d be without the thought. How would you feel if you weren’t caught up in the particular mindset or scenario you’re creating?
